Pythran Case: Resampling
########################

:date: 2016-03-09
:category: optimisation
:lang: en
:authors: serge-sans-paille
:summary: Optimizing an algorithm found on Stack Overflow with Pythran, getting a x2 speedup with a single line, a x4 speedup with two lines and much more while switching our brain on!

While hanging on `Stackoverflow <http://stackoverflow.com>`_ (everybody does
this, no?) I found this `Numpy code snippet
<http://stackoverflow.com/questions/21468170/numba-code-slower-than-pure-python>`_:

.. code:: python

    import numpy as np
    def resample(qs, xs, rands):
        results = np.empty_like(qs)
        lookup = np.cumsum(qs)
        for j, key in enumerate(rands):
            i = np.argmax(lookup > key)
            results[j] = xs[i]
        return results

When running it through `timeit <https://docs.python.org/2/library/timeit.html>`_, we get:

.. code:: sh

    % python -m timeit -s 'import numpy as np; np.random.seed(0) ; n = 1000; xs = np.arange(n, dtype=np.float64); qs = np.array([1.0/n,]*n); rands = np.random.rand(n); from resample import resample' 'resample(qs, xs, rands)'
    100 loops, best of 3: 3.02 msec per loop

The initialization code, after the ``-s`` switch, is run only once, and includes a call to ``np.random.seed`` so that further comparisons hold.

First step: Pythran
===================

What kind of optimisations could improve this code? ``np.cumsum``,
``np.argmax`` and ``lookup > key`` all are Numpy functions, so they run as native
code and there should not be much to gain there.

**But** if we look carefully, ``lookup > key`` is building an intermediate
array, which is then passed as argument to ``np.argmax``. This temporary array
is not needed, as ``np.argmax`` could work on a stream. That's a typical
shortcoming of Numpy `eager evaluation
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eager_evaluation>_`, a pedantic word to state
that expressions are evaluated when they are called, and not when their result
is needed (which is `lazy evaluation
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lazy_evaluation>`_).

Pythran automatically computes when an expression can be lazily evaluated,
(even when it's bound to a variable, which is not the case here). So maybe we
could get some speedup?

To use Pythran, we just add a comment line that states the expected types of
the top-level function:

.. code:: python

    #pythran export resample(float[], float[], float[])
    import numpy as np
    def resample(qs, xs, rands):
        results = np.empty_like(qs)
        lookup = np.cumsum(qs)
        for j, key in enumerate(rands):
            i = np.argmax(lookup > key)
            results[j] = xs[i]
        return results

And then call the ``pythran`` compiler:

.. code:: sh

    % pythran resample.py

This turns the Python file into a native extension, namely ``resample.so`` on Linux. Running it yields a nice speedup:

.. code:: sh

    % python -m timeit 'import numpy as np; np.random.seed(0) ; n = 1000; xs = np.arange(n, dtype=np.float64); qs = np.array([1.0/n,]*n); rands = np.random.rand(n); from resample import resample' 'resample(qs, xs, rands)'
    1000 loops, best of 3: 1.23 msec per loop

Second step: Pythran + OpenMP
=============================

But could we do better? An astute reader would note that the for loop can be
run in parallel (iterations are independent). There's a famous standard for C,
C++ and Fortran to parallelize this kind of trivial loops (and to do many non
trivial stuff also, but that's not the point here) called `OpenMP
<http://openmp.org/>`_. It turns out Pythran supports OpenMP :-). By adding an extra comment (that should look pretty familiar to anyone accustomed to OpenMP) on the parallel loop:

.. code:: python

    #pythran export resample(float[], float[], float[])
    import numpy as np
    def resample(qs, xs, rands):
        results = np.empty_like(qs)
        lookup = np.cumsum(qs)
        #omp parallel for
        for j, key in enumerate(rands):
            i = np.argmax(lookup > key)
            results[j] = xs[i]
        return results

And adding the ``-fopenmp`` flag to the ``pythran`` call:

.. code:: sh

    % pythran resample.py -fopenmp

We get an extra speedup (only two cores there, sorry about this :-/):

.. code:: sh

    % python -m timeit 'import numpy as np; np.random.seed(0) ; n = 1000; xs = np.arange(n, dtype=np.float64); qs = np.array([1.0/n,]*n); rands = np.random.rand(n); from resample import resample' 'resample(qs, xs, rands)'
    1000 loops, best of 3: 693 usec per loop


Third step: Pythran + Brain
===========================

Now wait… calling ``np.argmax`` on an array of ``bool`` is indeed a nice trick to get the index of the first value where ``lookup > key``, but it evaluates the whole array. There's no early exit, while there could be (there's only ``0`` and ``1`` after all). As pointed out on the `SO thread
<http://stackoverflow.com/questions/21468170/numba-code-slower-than-pure-python>`_, one could write a ``np_index(array_expr)`` function that behaves like the ``list.index`` one:

.. code:: python

    #pythran export resample(float[], float[], float[])
    import numpy as np

    def np_index(haystack, needle):
        for i, v in enumerate(haystack):
            if v == needle:
                return i
        raise ValueError("Value not found")

    def resample(qs, xs, rands):
        results = np.empty_like(qs)
        lookup = np.cumsum(qs)
        #omp parallel for
        for j, key in enumerate(rands):
            i = np_index(lookup > key, True)
            results[j] = xs[i]
        return results

There's a few things to note in this implementation:

    #. there's no ``pythran export`` for ``np_index`` as it's not meant to be used outside the module;

    #. ``np_index`` plays well with lazy evaluation: the tail of the ``lookup > key`` expression is not evaluated if a non null value is found before;

    #. Pythran supports built-in exceptions ;-)

And a last benchmark, without OpenMP:

.. code:: sh

    % pythran resample.py
    % python -m timeit 'import numpy as np; np.random.seed(0) ; n = 1000; xs = np.arange(n, dtype=np.float64); qs = np.array([1.0/n,]*n); rands = np.random.rand(n); from resample import resample' 'resample(qs, xs, rands)'
    1000 loops, best of 3: 491 usec per loop

And with OpenMP:

.. code:: sh

    % pythran resample.py -fopenmp
    % python -m timeit 'import numpy as np; np.random.seed(0) ; n = 1000; xs = np.arange(n, dtype=np.float64); qs = np.array([1.0/n,]*n); rands = np.random.rand(n); from resample import resample' 'resample(qs, xs, rands)'
    1000 loops, best of 3: 326 usec per loop

The Stack Overflow Solution
===========================

For reference, the Numba solution proposed as the answer to the Stack Overflow thread is:

.. code:: python

    @nb.jit(nb.f8[:](nb.f8[:]))
    def numba_cumsum(x):
        return np.cumsum(x)

    @nb.autojit
    def numba_resample2(qs, xs, rands):
        n = qs.shape[0]
        lookup = numba_cumsum(qs)
        results = np.empty(n)

        for j in range(n):
            for i in range(n):
                if rands[j] < lookup[i]:
                    results[j] = xs[i]
                    break
        return results

On my laptop, it runs in:

.. code:: sh

    10 loops, best of 3: 419 usec per loop

The equivalent implementation in Pythran does not need type annotation for ``np.cumsum`` as it's already supported:

.. code:: python

    #pythran export resample(float[], float[], float[])
    def resample(qs, xs, rands):
        n = qs.shape[0]
        lookup = np.cumsum(qs)
        results = np.empty(n)

        #omp parallel for
        for j in range(n):
            for i in range(n):
                if rands[j] < lookup[i]:
                    results[j] = xs[i]
                    break
        return results

And once compiled with Pythran it runs (no OpenMP) in:

.. code:: sh

    1000 loops, best of 3: 350 usec per loop


Pythran and Numba timings are within the same range. Numba is still easier to
integrate (Just In Time Compilation is really nice!) but it implies lower level
implementation. Pythran can still use this implementation level efficiently,
but that's not my preferred way of programming in Python ;-).

Final Thoughts
==============

This is only a story telling of the initial Stack Overflow post, reinterpreted
with Pythran in mind. What do we learn? Numpy provides a lot of nice
facilities, but one still need to understand some of its internal to rip the
best of it. And using Pythran you can do so while keeping a relatively good
abstraction!

