content/2018-08-05-asv.rst, before:

What is the air speed velocity of Pythran?
##########################################

:date: 2018-08-05
:category: benchmark
:lang: en
:authors: serge-sans-paille
:summary: Performance of the compiled code is an important feature of Pythran.
          Yet, Pythran had no unit test to prevent performance regression! Fortunately,
          thanks to a mix of `airspeed velocity
          <https://github.com/airspeed-velocity/asv/>`_ and `numpy-benchmark
          <https://github.com/serge-sans-paille/numpy-benchmarks/>`_, it is now a granted
          a decent way to track these regressions.

As many projects, `Pythran <https://github.com/serge-sans-paille/pythran>`_ has
its own test suite that runs on `travis-ci <http://travis-ci.org/>`_ and
`AppVeyor <http://appveyor.com/>`_. It's a nice test suite: it tests different
compilers—namely Clang, GCC and MVSCC—with different set of flags—with and
without OpenMP and vectorization— and for the 2.7 and 3.5 Python versions.
Nice. Brest.

A while ago, I started to collect various high-level Numpy kernels in the
`numpy-benchmark <https://github.com/serge-sans-paille/numpy-benchmarks/>`_
repo. The goal was to check how well Pythran behaves on these kernels, and to
compare it with other compilers. Over the time I've been adding new kernels
that showcase different optimization challenges, which leads us to more than 35
different kernels. I was occasionally using that set of kernels to check for
performance regression, but that was only semi-automated and rather tedious.

Then comes `airspeed velocity <https://github.com/airspeed-velocity/asv/>`_, a
tool that exactly brings the remaining bits: automated benchmarking over
software revision, regression tracking and nice plots. So it was just a matter
of stirring everything together to give birth to
https://github.com/serge-sans-paille/pythran-asv. In order not to break the
link with *numpy-benchmarks*, the original repo is imported as a `git subtree
<https://github.com/git/git/blob/master/contrib/subtree/git-subtree.txt>`_, and
the tests are automatically generated based on the kernel annotations :-)

Configuration
=============

As I don't have a dedicated machine to run the performance tracking session, I just ran:

.. code:: sh

    $ asv 0.8.6..master

Basically, this commands runs ``timeit`` on all kernels from *numpy-benchmarks*
according to the kernel annotations, but only once these kernels have been
compiled by the *Pythran* compiler extracted from the revisions ranging from
latest release, *0.8.6* and current *master*. A good way to check if the recent
commits brought any performance improvement or regressions.

.. note::

    Because I don't have a dedicated machine, these benchamrks were run during the
    night, with all apps closed, using a blank ``~/.pythranrc`` and GCC 7.3 and on
    goold'ol Python 2.7. For reference, I have an ``Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-6600U CPU
    @ 2.60GHz``, but as the goal is merely to track regression, the details are not
    as relevant as they could be for a traditional benchmark setup.

Subtilities
===========

Although *asv* works like a charm, some aspects requires care.

1. *Pythran* is an ahead of time compiler, so it does not make sense to track
   compilation time as part of the actual benchmark. *asv* does provide a
   ``setup`` mechanism, bit it proved to be too costly (the compilation is
   called multiple times, and it costs too much time when ranging over hundreds
   of commits). Fortunately, there is a ``setup_cache`` mechanism that fulfills
   our need perfectly!

2. *numpy-benchmarks* generally use randomized input, in order to avoid
   over-specialization of a benchmark for a given input set. In some cases this
   led to unstable behavior, so we occasionally forced the seed. Changing the
   kernel body is not an option, one of the interest of *numpy-benchmarks*
   being that they come from third-party source and are not tailored for a
   given compiler.

3. On very rare occasion, the *Pythran* annotation language evolves, and
   kernels that use new syntax cannot be compiled by older versions of
   *Pythran*. This actually happens only once, now that it is possible to
   specify the value dimension of a given dimension. As a workaround, if a
   kernel fails to compile, a rewrite rule automatically changes the annotation
   back to the traditional, less specialized one.

Results
=======

As of this post, the result of the regression test is available on
https://serge-sans-paille.github.io/pythran-asv/. It provides a good
illustration of the recent commits :-)

- `laplacien
  <https://serge-sans-paille.github.io/pythran-asv#benchmarks.TimeSuite.time_laplacien>`_
  greatly benefits from the partially static shape specialization introduced in
  `2e9dc6d694feae2be378fa5351e2cf5ad0c19f1b
  <https://github.com/serge-sans-paille/pythran/tree/2e9dc6d694feae2be378fa5351e2cf5ad0c19f1>`_.
  This commit also has a positive impact on `grayscott
  <https://serge-sans-paille.github.io/pythran-asv#benchmarks.TimeSuite.time_grayscott>`_,
  but a slightly negative impact on `wdist
  <https://serge-sans-paille.github.io/pythran-asv#benchmarks.TimeSuite.time_wdist>`_.

- `make_decision <>`_ exhibits a pattern captured by
  `a52ee30084549125ef34448f5ccf3013874331a9
  <https://github.com/serge-sans-paille/pythran/tree/a52ee30084549125ef34448f5ccf3013874331a9>`_
  : the square of the norm of a complex number.

- `reverse_cumsum <>`_ is returning a complex Numpy view, something Pythran can
  efficiently do since `8e8711365899009634653cc7e11a8cd36001c0c7
  <https://github.com/serge-sans-paille/pythran/tree/8e8711365899009634653cc7e11a8cd36001c0c7>`_.


Thanks and Future Works
=======================

The original idea of using *asv* to track *Pythran* performance comes from a
discussion with the `QuantStack <http://quantstack.net/>`_ guys. They really
are amazing folks, all the interactions I have with them really keep the
motivation up. They even funded all this regression tracking stuff for *Pythran*,
did I mention they're cool?

Next step is probably to run the regression suite on a larger commit range,
this may spot some more regressions or give hint for further improvements. And
I'm pretty confident `@wolfv <https://twitter.com/wuoulf>`_ will provide an
adaptation of *pythran-asv* for `xtensor
<https://github.com/QuantStack/xtensor>`_ as he `already did
<https://twitter.com/wuoulf/status/1016710926047825920>`_ for
*numpy-benchmark*.

Commit message:

Adda note on python -m perf

content/2018-08-05-asv.rst, after:

What is the air speed velocity of Pythran?
##########################################

:date: 2018-08-05
:category: benchmark
:lang: en
:authors: serge-sans-paille
:summary: Performance of the compiled code is an important feature of Pythran.
          Yet, Pythran had no unit test to prevent performance regression! Fortunately,
          thanks to a mix of `airspeed velocity
          <https://github.com/airspeed-velocity/asv/>`_ and `numpy-benchmark
          <https://github.com/serge-sans-paille/numpy-benchmarks/>`_, it is now a granted
          a decent way to track these regressions.

As many projects, `Pythran <https://github.com/serge-sans-paille/pythran>`_ has
its own test suite that runs on `travis-ci <http://travis-ci.org/>`_ and
`AppVeyor <http://appveyor.com/>`_. It's a nice test suite: it tests different
compilers—namely Clang, GCC and MVSCC—with different set of flags—with and
without OpenMP and vectorization— and for the 2.7 and 3.5 Python versions.
Nice. Brest.

A while ago, I started to collect various high-level Numpy kernels in the
`numpy-benchmark <https://github.com/serge-sans-paille/numpy-benchmarks/>`_
repo. The goal was to check how well Pythran behaves on these kernels, and to
compare it with other compilers. Over the time I've been adding new kernels
that showcase different optimization challenges, which leads us to more than 35
different kernels. I was occasionally using that set of kernels to check for
performance regression, but that was only semi-automated and rather tedious.

Then comes `airspeed velocity <https://github.com/airspeed-velocity/asv/>`_, a
tool that exactly brings the remaining bits: automated benchmarking over
software revision, regression tracking and nice plots. So it was just a matter
of stirring everything together to give birth to
https://github.com/serge-sans-paille/pythran-asv. In order not to break the
link with *numpy-benchmarks*, the original repo is imported as a `git subtree
<https://github.com/git/git/blob/master/contrib/subtree/git-subtree.txt>`_, and
the tests are automatically generated based on the kernel annotations :-)

Configuration
=============

As I don't have a dedicated machine to run the performance tracking session, I just ran:

.. code:: sh

    $ asv 0.8.6..master

Basically, this commands runs ``timeit`` on all kernels from *numpy-benchmarks*
according to the kernel annotations, but only once these kernels have been
compiled by the *Pythran* compiler extracted from the revisions ranging from
latest release, *0.8.6* and current *master*. A good way to check if the recent
commits brought any performance improvement or regressions.

In order to reduce system glitter, the following one-liner helps a lot:

.. code:: sh

    $ python -m perf system tune

.. note::

    Because I don't have a dedicated machine, these benchamrks were run during the
    night, with all apps closed, using a blank ``~/.pythranrc`` and GCC 7.3 and on
    goold'ol Python 2.7. For reference, I have an ``Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-6600U CPU
    @ 2.60GHz``, but as the goal is merely to track regression, the details are not
    as relevant as they could be for a traditional benchmark setup.

Subtilities
===========

Although *asv* works like a charm, some aspects requires care.

1. *Pythran* is an ahead of time compiler, so it does not make sense to track
   compilation time as part of the actual benchmark. *asv* does provide a
   ``setup`` mechanism, bit it proved to be too costly (the compilation is
   called multiple times, and it costs too much time when ranging over hundreds
   of commits). Fortunately, there is a ``setup_cache`` mechanism that fulfills
   our need perfectly!

2. *numpy-benchmarks* generally use randomized input, in order to avoid
   over-specialization of a benchmark for a given input set. In some cases this
   led to unstable behavior, so we occasionally forced the seed. Changing the
   kernel body is not an option, one of the interest of *numpy-benchmarks*
   being that they come from third-party source and are not tailored for a
   given compiler.

3. On very rare occasion, the *Pythran* annotation language evolves, and
   kernels that use new syntax cannot be compiled by older versions of
   *Pythran*. This actually happens only once, now that it is possible to
   specify the value dimension of a given dimension. As a workaround, if a
   kernel fails to compile, a rewrite rule automatically changes the annotation
   back to the traditional, less specialized one.

Results
=======

As of this post, the result of the regression test is available on
https://serge-sans-paille.github.io/pythran-asv/. It provides a good
illustration of the recent commits :-)

- `laplacien
  <https://serge-sans-paille.github.io/pythran-asv#benchmarks.TimeSuite.time_laplacien>`_
  greatly benefits from the partially static shape specialization introduced in
  `2e9dc6d694feae2be378fa5351e2cf5ad0c19f1b
  <https://github.com/serge-sans-paille/pythran/tree/2e9dc6d694feae2be378fa5351e2cf5ad0c19f1>`_.
  This commit also has a positive impact on `grayscott
  <https://serge-sans-paille.github.io/pythran-asv#benchmarks.TimeSuite.time_grayscott>`_,
  but a slightly negative impact on `wdist
  <https://serge-sans-paille.github.io/pythran-asv#benchmarks.TimeSuite.time_wdist>`_.

- `make_decision <>`_ exhibits a pattern captured by
  `a52ee30084549125ef34448f5ccf3013874331a9
  <https://github.com/serge-sans-paille/pythran/tree/a52ee30084549125ef34448f5ccf3013874331a9>`_
  : the square of the norm of a complex number.

- `reverse_cumsum <>`_ is returning a complex Numpy view, something Pythran can
  efficiently do since `8e8711365899009634653cc7e11a8cd36001c0c7
  <https://github.com/serge-sans-paille/pythran/tree/8e8711365899009634653cc7e11a8cd36001c0c7>`_.


Thanks and Future Works
=======================

The original idea of using *asv* to track *Pythran* performance comes from a
discussion with the `QuantStack <http://quantstack.net/>`_ guys. They really
are amazing folks, all the interactions I have with them really keep the
motivation up. They even funded all this regression tracking stuff for *Pythran*,
did I mention they're cool?

Next step is probably to run the regression suite on a larger commit range,
this may spot some more regressions or give hint for further improvements. And
I'm pretty confident `@wolfv <https://twitter.com/wuoulf>`_ will provide an
adaptation of *pythran-asv* for `xtensor
<https://github.com/QuantStack/xtensor>`_ as he `already did
<https://twitter.com/wuoulf/status/1016710926047825920>`_ for
*numpy-benchmark*.
